<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>The Lesser Catechism</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h3 class="secondary">THE LESSER CATECHISM</h3>
<p class="front-matter-prose first"><b>Ques.</b> Whence is all truth concerning God and ourselves to be learned?</p>
<p class="front-matter-prose"><b>Ans.</b> From the holy Scripture, the Word of God. — Chapter 1 of the Greater Catechism.</p>
<p class="front-matter-prose"><b>Q.</b> What do the Scriptures teach that God is?</p>
<p class="front-matter-prose"><b>A.</b> An eternal, infinite, most holy Spirit, giving being to all things, and doing with them whatsoever he pleaseth. — Chapter 2.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> Is there but one God?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> One only, in respect of his essence and being, but one in three distinct persons, of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. — Chapter 3.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> What else is held forth in the Word concerning God, that we ought to know.?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> His decrees, and his works. — Chapter 4.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> What are the decrees of God concerning us?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> His eternal purposes, of saving some by Jesus Christ, for the praise of his glory, and of condemning others for their sins. — Chapter 5.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> What are the works of God?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Acts or doings of his power, whereby he createth, sustaineth, and governeth all things. — Chapter 6.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> What is required from us towards Almighty God?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Holy and spiritual obedience, according to his law given unto us — Chapter 7.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> Are we able to do this of ourselves?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> No, in no wise, being by nature unto every good work reprobate. — Chapter 7.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> How came we into this estate, being at the first created in the image of God, in righteousness and innocency?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> By the fall of our first parents, breaking the covenant of God, losing his grace, and deserving his curse. — Chapter 8.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> By what way may we be delivered from this miserable estate?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Only by Jesus Christ. — Chapter 9.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> What is Jesus Christ?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> God and man united in one person, to be a mediator between God and man. — Chap 10.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> What is he unto us?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> A King, a Priest, and a Prophet. — Chapter 11.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> Wherein does he exercise his kingly power towards us?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> In converting us unto God by his Spirit, subduing us unto his obedience, and ruling in us by his grace. — Chapter 12.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> In what does the exercise of his priestly office for us chiefly consist?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> In offering up himself an acceptable sacrifice on the cross, so satisfying the justice of God for our sins, removing his curse from our persons, and bringing us unto him. — Chapter 13.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> Wherein does Christ exercise his prophetical office towards us?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> In revealing to our hearts, from the bosom of his Father, the way and truth whereby we must come unto him. — Chapter 13.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> In what condition does Jesus Christ exercise these offices?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> He did in a low estate of humiliation on earth, but now in a glorious estate of exaltation in heaven. — Chapter 14.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> For whose sake does Christ perform all these?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Only for his elect. — Chapter 15.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> What is the church of Christ?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> The universal company of God’s elect, called to the adoption of children. — Chapter 16.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> How come we to be members of this church?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> By a lively faith. — Chapter 17.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> What is a lively faith?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> An assured resting of the soul upon God’s promises of mercy in Jesus Christ, for pardon of sins here and glory hereafter. — Chapter 18.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> How come we to have this faith?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> By the effectual working of the Spirit of God in our hearts, freely calling us from the state of nature to the state of grace. — Chapter 18.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> Are we accounted righteous for our faith?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> No, but only for the righteousness of Christ, freely imputed unto us, and laid hold of by faith. — Chapter 19.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> Is there no more required of us but faith only?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Yes; repentance also, and holiness. — Chapter 20.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2</b> . What is repentance?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> A forsaking of all sin, with godly sorrow for what we have committed.</p>
<p>- Chapter 20.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 3.</b> What is that holiness which is required of us?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Universal obedience to the will of God revealed unto us. — Chapter 20.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> What are the privileges of believers?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> First, union with Christ; secondly, adoption of children; thirdly, communion of saints; fourthly, right to the seals of the new covenant; fifthly, Christian liberty; sixthly, resurrection of the body to life eternal.</p>
<p>- Chapter 21.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> What are the sacraments, or seals, of the new covenant?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Visible seals of God’s spiritual promises, made unto us in the blood of Jesus Christ. — Chapter 22.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2.</b> Which be they?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Baptism and the Lord’s supper.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> What is baptism?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> A holy ordinance, whereby, being sprinkled with water according to Christ’s institution, we are by his grace made children of God, and have the promises of the covenant sealed unto us. — Chapter 23.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> What is the Lord’s supper?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> A holy ordinance of Christ, appointed to communicate unto believers his body and blood spiritually, being represented by bread and wine, blessed, broken, poured out, and received of them. — Chapter 24.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> Who have a right unto this sacrament?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> They only who have an interest in Jesus Christ by faith. — Chapter 24.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> What is the communion of saints?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> A holy conjunction between all God’s people, partakers of the same Spirit, and members of the same mystical body. — Chapter 25.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q.</b> What is the end of all this dispensation?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> The glory of God in our salvation.</p>
<p class="doxology"><i><b>Glory be to God on high!</b></i></p></section>
  </body>
</html>
