<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Preface (Glory of Christ)</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h2 class="front-matter-heading">Original Preface</h2>
<h2 class="front-matter-heading">To The Reader</h2>
<p class="front-matter-prose first">The design of this preface is not to commend either the author or the matter contained in this little book. Let every reader do as he finds cause.</p>
<p class="front-matter-prose">Nor need any assurance be given that Dr. Owen was the author, to any who have conversed with his writings, and will be at the pains to read this over. It is, indeed, his application of the former Discourses upon this subject, printed in the year 1684. But the reason why it was not then added (the omission whereof rendered that book imperfect to judicious readers) seems necessary to be given. Had it pleased God he had lived a little longer, it would have come out as perfect as his other works. But there being no more transcribed in his lifetime than what was then printed, and that published soon after his death, these two chapters, wrote only with his own hand, were found too late to be then added. They are therefore now printed to complete those Discourses. And it is presumed, that as no serious Christian who reads this will be satisfied without the other also, so all who prize the former will be glad of the opportunity to add this thereunto.<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn18"><sup>18</sup></a></p></section>
  </body>
</html>
