<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 10 - of the Person of Jesus Christ.</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h1 class="secondary">CHAPTER 10</h1>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">OF THE PERSON OF JESUS CHRIST.</h4>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> What does the Scripture teach us of Jesus Christ?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Chiefly two things first, his<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn62"><sup>62</sup></a> person, or what he is in himself; secondly, his offices, or what he is unto us.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2.</b> What does it teach of his person?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> That he is truly God, and perfect man, partaker of the natures of God and man in one person, between whom he is a Mediator. John 1:14; Hebrews 2:14, 15; Ephesians 4:5; 1 Timothy 2:5; 1 John 1:1.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 3.</b> How prove you Jesus Christ to be truly God?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Divers ways; first, by places of Scripture, speaking of the great God Jehovah in the Old Testament, applied to our Savior in the New; as, Numb. 21:5, 6, in 1 Corinthians 10:9; Psalm 102:25-27, in Hebrews 1:10; Isaiah 6:2-4, in John 12:40,41; Isaiah 8:13,14, in Luke 2:34, Romans 9:33; Isaiah 40:3, 4, in John 1:23; Isaiah 45:22, 23, in Romans 14:11, Philippians 2:10, 11; Malachi 3:1, in Matthew 11:10.</p>
<p>Secondly, By the works of the Deity ascribed unto him; as, first, of creation, John 1:3; 1 Corinthians 8:6; Hebrews 1:2; secondly, of preservation in providence, Hebrews 1:3; John 5:17; thirdly, miracles.</p>
<p>Thirdly, By the essential attributes of God being ascribed unto him; as, first, immensity, Matthew 28:20; John 14:23; Ephesians 3:17; secondly, eternity, John 1:1; Revelation 1:11; Micah 5:2; thirdly, immutability, Hebrews 1:11, 12; fourthly, omniscience, John 21:17; Revelation 2:23; fifthly, majesty and glory equal to his Father, John 5:23; Revelation 5:13; Philippians 1:2, 2:6, 9, 10.</p>
<p>Fourthly, By the names given unto him; as, first, of God expressly, John 1:1, 20:28; Acts 20:28; Romans 9:5; Philippians 17:6; Hebrews 1:8; 1 Timothy 3:16; secondly, of the Son of God, John 1:18; Romans 8:3, etc.</p>
<p>secondly, of the Son of God, Romans 8:3, etc.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 4.</b> Was it necessary that our Redeemer should be God?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Yes; that he might be able to save to the uttermost, and to satisfy the wrath of his Father, which no creature could perform. Isaiah 43:25, 53:6; Daniel 9:17, 19.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 5.</b> How prove you that he was a perfect man?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> First, By the prophecies that went before, that so he should be.</p>
<p>Secondly, By the relation of their accomplishment. Thirdly, By the Scriptures assigning to him those things which are required to a perfect man; as, first, a body, secondly, a soul, and therein, first, a will, secondly, affections, thirdly, endowments, Fourthly, General infirmities of nature. Genesis 2:15, 18:18. Matthew 1:1; Romans 1:4; Galatians 4:4. Luke 24:39; Mark 14:34; Hebrews 2:17, 10:5; Mark 3:5; 1 John 1:1; Matthew 26:38; Mark 14:34; Matthew 26:39; Mark 3:5; Luke 10:21; Luke 2:52. Matthew 4:2; John 4:6; Hebrews 2:18.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 6.</b> Wherefore was our Redeemer to be man?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> That the nature which had offended might suffer, and make satisfaction, and so he might be every way a fit and sufficient Savior for men. Hebrews 2:10-17.</p></section>
  </body>
</html>
