<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 11 - of the Offices of Christ; And, First, of His Kingly.</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h1 class="secondary">CHAPTER 11</h1>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">OF THE OFFICES OF CHRIST; AND, FIRST, OF HIS KINGLY.</h4>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> How many are the offices of Jesus Christ?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Three; first, of a King; secondly, of<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn63"><sup>63</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn64"><sup>64</sup></a> Priest; thirdly, of Prophet. Psalm 2:6. Psalm 110:4. Deuteronomy 18:15.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2.</b> Hath he these offices peculiar by nature?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> No; he only received them for offended might suffer, and make satisfaction, and so he might be every way a fit and sufficient Savior for men. until the work of redemption be perfected. Psalm 110:1; Acts 2:36, 10:42; 1 Corinthians 11:3, 15:27, 28; Philippians 26:9; Hebrews 3:2, 6, 2:7-9.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 3.</b> Wherein does the kingly office of Christ consist?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> In a two-fold power; first, his power of ruling in and over his church; secondly, his power of subduing his enemies. Psalm 110:3-7.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 4.</b> What is his ruling power in and over his people?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> That supreme authority which,<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn65"><sup>65</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn66"><sup>66</sup></a> Christ’s subjects are all for their everlasting good, born rebels, and are he useth towards them, stubborn, until he make them whereof in general there be obedient by his Word and two acts; spirit. first, internal and spiritual, in converting their souls unto him, making them unto himself a willing, obedient, persevering people; secondly, eternal and ecclesiastical, in giving perfect laws and rules for their government, as gathered into holy societies under him. Isaiah 53:12, 59:20, 21; Hebrews 8:10-12; Isaiah 61:1, 2; John 1:16, 12:32; Mark 1:15; Matthew 28:20; 2 Corinthians 10:4, 5. Matthew 16:19; 1 Corinthians 12:28; Ephesians 4:8-14; 2 Timothy 3:16, 17; Revelation 22:18, 19.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 5.</b> How many are the acts of his kingly power towards his enemies?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Two also first, internal, by the<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn67"><sup>67</sup></a> mighty working of his Word, and the spirit of bondage upon their hearts, convincing, amazing, terrifying their consciences, hardening their spirits for ruin; Secondly, external, in judgements and vengeance, which ofttimes he beginneth in this life, and will continue unto eternity. Psalm 110; John 6:46, 8:59; 9:41; 12:40; 2 Corinthians 10:4-6; 1 Corinthians 5:6; 1 Timothy 1:20. Mark 16:16Mark Luke 19:27; Acts 13:11; Revelation 17:14.</p></section>
  </body>
</html>
