<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 7 - of the Law of God.</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h1 class="secondary">CHAPTER 7</h1>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">OF THE LAW OF GOD.</h4>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> Which is the law that God gave man at first to fulfill?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> The same which was afterwards<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn55"><sup>55</sup></a> written with the finger of God in two tables of stone Mount Horeb, called the Ten Commandments. Romans 2:14, 15.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2.</b> Is the observation of this law still required of us?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Yes, to the uttermost tittle. Matthew 5:17; 1 John 3:4; Romans 3:31; James 2:8-10; Galatians 3.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 3.</b> Are we able of ourselves to<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn56"><sup>56</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn57"><sup>57</sup></a> perform it?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> No, in no wise; the law is spiritual, but we are carnal. 1 Kings 8:46; Genesis 6:5; John 15:5; Romans 7:14, 8:7; 1 John 1:8.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 4.</b> Did, then, God give a law which could not be kept?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> No; when God gave it, we had power to keep it; which since we have lost in Adam. Genesis 1:26; Ephesians 4:19; Romans 5:12.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 5.</b> Whereto, then, does the law now serve?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> For two general ends; first, to be a rule of our duty, or to discover to us the obedience of God required; secondly, lets drive us unto Christ. Psalm 19:7-11; 1 Timothy 1:8, 9. Galatians 3:24.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 6.</b> How does the law drive us unto Christ?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Divers ways; as, first, by laying open unto us the utter disability of our nature to do any good; secondly, by charging the wrath and curse of God, due to sin, upon the conscience; thirdly, by bringing the whole soul under bondage to sin, death, Satan, and hell — so making us long and seek for a Savior. Romans 7:7-9; Galatians 3:19. Romans 3:19, 20, 4:15, 5:20; Galatians 3:10. Galatians 3:22; Hebrews 2:15.</p></section>
  </body>
</html>
