<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 3 - of the Holy Trinity.</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h1 class="secondary">CHAPTER 3</h1>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">OF THE HOLY TRINITY.</h4>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> Is there but one God to whom these properties do belong?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> One only, in respect of his essence and being but one in three distinct persons, of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Deuteronomy 6:4; Matthew 19:17; Ephesians 4:5, 6. Genesis 1:26; 1 John 5:7; Matthew 28:19.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2.</b> What mean you by person?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> A distinct manner of<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn34"><sup>34</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn35"><sup>35</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn36"><sup>36</sup></a> subsistence or being, distinguished from the other persons by its own properties. John 5:17; Hebrews 1:3.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 3.</b> What is the distinguishing property of the person of the Father?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> To be of himself only the fountain of the Godhead. John 5:26, 27; Ephesians 1:3.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 4.</b> What is the property of the Son?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> To be begotten of his Father from eternity. Psalm 2:7; John 1:14, 3:16.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 5.</b> What of the Holy ghost?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> To proceed from the Father and the Son. John 14:17, 16:14, 15:26, 20:22.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 6.</b> Are these three one?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> One every way, in nature, will, and essential properties, distinguished only in their personal manner of subsistence. John 10:30; Romans 3:30. John 15:26; 1 John 5:7.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 7.</b> Can we conceive these things as they are in themselves?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Neither we nor yet the angels<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn37"><sup>37</sup></a> of heaven are at all able to dive into these secrets, as they are internally God; but in respect of the outward dispensation of themselves to us by creation, redemption, and sanctification, a knowledge may be attained of these things, saving and heavenly. 1 Timothy 6:16. Isaiah 6:2, 3. Colossians 1:11-14.</p></section>
  </body>
</html>
