<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 8 - of the State of Corrupted Nature.</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h1 class="secondary">CHAPTER 8.</h1>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">OF THE STATE OF CORRUPTED NATURE.</h4>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> How came this weakness and disability upon us?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> By the sin and<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn58"><sup>58</sup></a> shameful fall of our first parents. Romans 5:12, 14.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2.</b> Wherein did that hurt us, their posterity?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Divers ways; first, in that we were all guilty of the same breach of covenant with Adam, being all in him; secondly, our souls with his were deprived of that holiness, innocence, and righteousness wherein they were at first created; thirdly, pollution and defilement of nature came upon us; with, fourthly, an extreme disability of doing any thing that is wellpleasing unto God; by all which we are made obnoxious to the curse. John 3:36; Romans 5:12; Ephesians 2:3. Genesis 3:10; Ephesians 4:23, 24; Colossians 3:10. Job 14:4; Psalm 51:7; John 3:6; Romans 3:13. Genesis 6:5; Ephesians 2:1; Jeremiah 6:16, 13:23; Romans 8:7. Genesis 3:17; Galatians 3:10.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 3.</b> Wherein does the curse of God consist?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> In divers things; first, in the<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn59"><sup>59</sup></a> guilt of death, temporal and eternal; secondly, the loss of the grace and favor of God; thirdly, guilt and horror of conscience, despair and anguish here; with, fourthly, eternal damnation hereafter. Genesis 2:17; Romans 1:18, 5:12, 17; Ephesians 2:3. Genesis 3:24; Ezekiel 16:3-5; Ephesians 2:13. Genesis 3:10; Isaiah 48:22; Romans 3:9, 19, Galatians 3:22. Genesis 3:10, 13; John 3:36.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 4.</b> Are all men born in this estate?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Every one without exception. Psalm 51:5; Isaiah 53:6; Romans 3:9-12; Ephesians 2:3.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 5.</b> And do they continue therein?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Of themselves<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn60"><sup>60</sup></a> they cannot otherwise do, Being able neither to know, nor will, nor do any thing that is spiritually good and pleasing unto God. Acts 8:31, 16:14; 1 Corinthians 2:14; Ephesians 5:8; John 1:5. Jeremiah 6:16, 13:23; Luke 4:18; Romans 6:16, 8:7. John 6:44; 2 Corinthians 3:5.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 6.</b> Have they, then, no way of themselves to escape the curse and wrath of God?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> None at all; they can neither satisfy his justice, nor fulfill his law.</p></section>
  </body>
</html>
