<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 4 - of the Works of God; And, First, of Those That Are Internal and Immanent.</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h1 class="secondary">CHAPTER 4</h1>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">OF THE WORKS OF GOD; AND, FIRST, OF THOSE THAT ARE</h4>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">INTERNAL AND IMMANENT.</h4>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> What do the Scriptures teach concerning the works of God?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> That they are of two sorts; first, internal,<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn38"><sup>38</sup></a> in his counsel, decrees, and purposes, towards his creatures; secondly, external, in his works over and about them, to the praise of his own glory. Acts 15:18; Proverbs 16:4.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2.</b> What are the decrees of God?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Eternal, unchangeable purposes<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn39"><sup>39</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn40"><sup>40</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn41"><sup>41</sup></a> of his will, concerning the being and well-being of his creatures. Micah 5:2; Ephesians 3:9-11; Acts 15:18. Isaiah 14:24, 46:10; Romans 9:11; 2 Timothy 2:19.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 3.</b> Concerning which of his creatures chiefly are his decrees to be considered?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Angels and men, for whom other things were ordained. 1 Timothy 5:21; Jude 6.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 4.</b> What are the decrees of God concerning men?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Election and reprobation. Romans 9:11-13.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 5.</b> What is the decree of election?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> The eternal, fire immutable<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn42"><sup>42</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn43"><sup>43</sup></a> purpose of God, whereby in Jesus Christ he chooseth unto himself whom he pleaseth out of whole mankind, determining to bestow upon them, for his sake, grace here, and everlasting happiness hereafter, for the praise of his glory, by way of mercy.<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn44"><sup>44</sup></a> Ephesians 1:4; Acts 13:48; Romans 8:29, 30. Matthew 11:26. 2 Timothy 2:19. Ephesians 1:4, 5; Matthew 22:14. Romans 9:18-21. John 6:37, 17:6, 9, 11, 24.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 6.</b> Doth any thing in us move the Lord thus to choose us from amongst others?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> No, in no wise; we are in the same lump with others rejected when separated by his undeserved grace. Romans 9:11, 12; Matthew 11:25 1 Corinthians 4:7; 2 Timothy 1:9.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 7.</b> What is the decree of reprobation?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> The eternal purpose of God to suffer many to sin, leave them in their sin, and not giving them to Christ, to punish them for their sin. Romans 9:11 sin, and not giving them to Christ, to punish them for their sin. Romans 9:11, 12, 21, 22; Proverbs 16:4; Matthew 11:25, 26; 2 Peter 2:12; Jude 1:4Jude 4.</p></section>
  </body>
</html>
