<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 5 - of the Works of God That Outwardly Are of Him.</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h1 class="secondary">CHAPTER 5.</h1>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">OF THE WORKS OF GOD THAT OUTWARDLY ARE OF HIM.</h4>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> What are the works of God that outwardly respect his creatures?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> First, of creation; secondly, of<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn45"><sup>45</sup></a> actual providence. Psalm 33:9; Hebrews 1:2, 3.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2.</b> What is the work of creation?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> An act or work of God’s almighty power, whereby of nothing, in six days, he created heaven, earth, and the sea, with all things in them contained. Genesis 1:1; Exodus 20:11; Proverbs 16:4.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 3.</b> Wherefore did God make man?</p>
<p class="catechism-item">A.For his own glory in his service<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn46"><sup>46</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn47"><sup>47</sup></a> and obedience. Genesis 1:26, 27, 2:16, 17; Romans 9:23.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 4.</b> Was man able to yield the service and worship that God required of him?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Yea, to the uttermost, being created upright in the image of God, in purity, innocence, righteousness, and holiness. Genesis 1:26; Ecclesiastes 7:29; Ephesians 4:24; Colossians 3:10.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 5.</b> What was the rule whereby man was at first to be directed in his obedience?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> The moral<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn48"><sup>48</sup></a> or eternal law of God, implanted in his nature and written in his heart by creation, being the tenor of the covenant between him, sacramentally typified by the tree of knowledge good and evil. Genesis 2:15-17; Romans 2:14, 15; Ephesians 4:24.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 6.</b> Do we stand in the same covenant still, and have we the same power to yield obedience unto God?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> No; the covenant was<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn49"><sup>49</sup></a> broken by the sin of Adam, with whom it was made, our nature corrupted, and all power to do good utterly lost. Genesis 3:16-18; Galatians 3:10, 11, 21; Hebrews 7:19, 8:13. Job 14:4; Psalm 51:5. Genesis 6:5; Jeremiah 13:23.</p>
<p>13.</p></section>
  </body>
</html>
