<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 16 - of the Church.</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h1 class="secondary">CHAPTER 16</h1>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">OF THE CHURCH.</h4>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> How are the elect called, in respect of their obedience unto Christ, and union with him?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> His church. Acts 20:28; Ephesians 5:32.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2.</b> What is the church of Christ?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> The whole company of God’s<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn86"><sup>86</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn87"><sup>87</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn88"><sup>88</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn89"><sup>89</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn90"><sup>90</sup></a> elect, called by the Word and Spirit, out of their natural condition, to the dignity of his children, and united unto Christ their head, by faith, in the bond of the Spirit. Acts 2:47; 1 Timothy 5:21; Hebrews 12:22-24. Romans 1:5, 6, 9:11,24; 1 Corinthians 4:15; 2 Timothy 1:9. Acts 16:14; John 3:8; 1 Corinthians 4:15; 1 Peter 1:23; Hebrews 8:10. Ephesians 2:11-13; Colossians 1:13; Hebrews 2:14, 15; 1 Peter 2:9. John 17:21; Ephesians 2:18-22.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 3.</b> Is this whole church always in the same state?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> No; one part of it is militant, the other triumphant.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 4.</b> What is the church militant?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> That portion of God’s elect which, in their generation, cleaveth unto Christ by faith, and fighteth against the world, flesh, and devil. Ephesians 6:11, 12; Hebrews 11:13, 14, 12:1, 4.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 5.</b> What is the church triumphant?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> That portion of God’s people who, having fought their fight and kept the faith, are now in heaven, resting from their labors. Ephesians 5:27; Revelation 3:21, 14:13.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 6.</b> Are not the church of the Jews before the birth of Christ, and the church of the Christians since, two churches?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> No; essentially they are but one,<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn91"><sup>91</sup></a> differing only in some outward administrations. Ephesians 2:11-16; 1 Corinthians 10:3; Galatians 4:26 administrations. Galatians 4:26, 27; Hebrews 11:16, 26, 40.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 7.</b> Can this church be wholly overthrown on the earth?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> No; unless the decree of God may be changed, and the promise of Christ fail. Matthew 16:18, 28:20; John 14:16; John 17; 1 Timothy 3:15 Christ fail. 2 Timothy 2:19.</p></section>
  </body>
</html>
