<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 18 - of Our Vocation, or God's Calling Us.</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h1 class="secondary">CHAPTER 18</h1>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">OF OUR VOCATION, OR GOD’S CALLING US.</h4>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> How come we to have this saving faith?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> It is freely bestowed upon us and wrought in us by the Spirit of God, in our vocation or calling. John 6:29,44; Ephesians 2:8, 9; Philippians 1:29; 2 Thessalonians 1:11.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2.</b> What is our vocation, or this calling of God?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> The free, gracious<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn94"><sup>94</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn95"><sup>95</sup></a> act of Almighty God, whereby in Jesus Christ he calleth and translateth us from the state of nature, sin, wrath, and corruption, into the state of grace and union with Christ, by the mighty, effectual working of his Spirit in the preaching of the Word. Colossians 1:12,13; 2 Timothy 1:9; Deuteronomy 30:6; Ezekiel 36:26; Matthew 11:25, 26; John 1:13, 3:3, 8; Ephesians 1:19; Colossians 2:12; 1 Corinthians 4:7; James 1:18; 2 Peter 2:20; Acts 16:14.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 3.</b> What do we ourselves perform in this change, or work of our conversion?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Nothing at all, being merely<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn96"><sup>96</sup></a> church are outwardly called by the Word, none effectually but the elect. in ourselves we have no ability to any thing that is spiritually good. Matthew 7:18, 10:20; John 1:13, 15:5; 1 Corinthians 12:3, 2:5; 2 Corinthians 3:5; Ephesians 2:1, 8; Romans 8:26; Philippians 1:6.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 4.</b> Does God thus call all and every one?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> All within the pale of the church are outwardly called by the Word, none effectually but the elect. Matthew 22:14; Romans 8:30.</p></section>
  </body>
</html>
