<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 12 - of Christ's Priestly Office.</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h1 class="secondary">CHAPTER 12</h1>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">OF CHRIST’S PRIESTLY OFFICE.</h4>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> By what means did Jesus Christ undertake the office of an eternal priest?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> By the decree, ordination, and will of God his Father, whereunto he yielded voluntary obedience; so that concerning this there was a compact and covenant between them. Psalm 110:4; Hebrews 5:5, 6; 7:17,18. Isaiah 50:4-6; Hebrews 10:5-10. Psalm 2:7, 8; Isaiah 53:8, 10-12; Philippians 2:7, 9; Hebrews 12:2; John 17:2, 4.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2.</b> Wherein does his execration of this office consist?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> In bringing his people unto God. Hebrews 2:10, 4:16, 7:25.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 3.</b> What are the parts of it?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> First, oblation; secondly, intercession.<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn68"><sup>68</sup></a> Hebrews 9:14. Hebrews 7:25.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 4.</b> What is the oblation of Christ?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> The offering up of himself secondly, intercession. an holy propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of all the elect throughout the world; as also, the presentation of himself for us in heaven, sprinkled with the blood of the covenant. Isaiah 53:10,12; John 3:16, 11:51, 17:19; Hebrews 9:13, 14. Hebrews 9:24.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 5.</b> Whereby does this oblation do good unto us?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Divers ways; first, in that it satisfied the justice of God; secondly, it redeemed us from the power of sin, death, and hell; thirdly, it ratified the new covenant of grace; fourthly, it procured for us grace here, and glory hereafter; by all which means the peace and reconciliation between God and us is wrought. Ephesians 2:14, 15.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 6.</b> How did the oblation of Christ satisfy God’s justice for our sin?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> In that for us he underwent the<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn69"><sup>69</sup></a> punishment due to our sin.</p>
<p>25; 1 Corinthians 15:31 Corinthians15:3; Ephesians 5:2; 1 Peter 2:24.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 7.</b> What was that punishment?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> The wrath of God, the curse<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn70"><sup>70</sup></a> of the law, the pains of hell, due to sinners, in body and soul. Genesis 2:17; Deuteronomy 27:15-26; Isaiah 59:2; Romans 5:12; Ephesians 2:3; John 3:36; Hebrews 2:14.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 8.</b> Did Christ undergo all these?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Yes; in respect of the greatness<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn71"><sup>71</sup></a> and extremity, not the eternity and continuance of those pains; for it was impossible he should be holden of death. Matthew 26:28; Mark 14:33, 34; 15:34; Galatians 3:13; Ephesians 2:16; Colossians 1:20; Hebrews 5:7; Psalm 18:5.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 9.</b> How could the punishment of one satisfy for the offense of all?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> In that he was not a mere<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn72"><sup>72</sup></a> man only, but God also, of infinitely more value than all those who had offended. Romans 5:9; Hebrews 9:26; 1 Peter 3:18.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 10.</b> How did the oblation of Christ redeem from death and hell?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> First, by paying a ransom<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn73"><sup>73</sup></a> to God, the judge and lawgiver, who had condemned us; secondly, by overcoming and spoiling Satan, death, and the powers of hell, that detained us captives. Matthew 20:28; John 6:51; Mark 10:45; Romans 3:25; 1 Corinthians 6:20; Galatians 3:13; Ephesians 1:7; 1 Timothy 2:6; Ephesians 1:7; Hebrews 10:9. John 5:24; Colossians 2:13-15; 1 Thessalonians 1:10; Hebrews 2:14; 1 Peter 1:18, 19.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 11.</b> What was the ransom that Christ paid for us?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> His own precious blood. Acts 20:28; 1 Peter 1:19.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 12.</b> How was the new covenant ratified in his blood?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> By being accompanied with<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn74"><sup>74</sup></a> his death; for that, as all other testaments, was to be ratified by the death of the testator. Genesis 22:18 Hebrews 9:16, 8:10-12.</p>
<p>10-12.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 13.</b> What is this new covenant?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> The gracious, free, immutable promise of God, made unto all his elect fallen in Adam, to give them Jesus Christ, and in him mercy, pardon, grace, and glory, with a re-stipulation of faith from them unto this promise, and new obedience. Genesis 3:15; Jeremiah 31:31-34, 32:40; Hebrews 8:10-12. Galatians 3:8, 16; Genesis 12:3. Romans 8:32; Ephesians 1:3, 4. Mark 16:16; John 1:12, 10:27, 28.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 14.</b> How did Christ procure for us grace, faith, and glory?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> By the way of purchase<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn75"><sup>75</sup></a> and merit; for the death of Christ deservedly procured of God that he should bless us with all<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn76"><sup>76</sup></a> spiritual blessings needful for our coming unto him. Isaiah 53:11, 12; John 17:2; Acts 20:28; Romans 5:17, 18; Ephesians 2:15, 16, 1:4; Philippians 1:29; Titus 2:14; Revelation 1:5, 6.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 15.</b> What is the intercession of Christ?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> His continual soliciting<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn77"><sup>77</sup></a> of God on our behalf, begun here in fervent prayers, continued in heaven by appearing as our advocate at the throne of grace. Psalm 2:8; Romans 8:34; Hebrews 7:25, 9:24, 10:19-21;</p></section>
  </body>
</html>
