<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 24 - of the Lord's Supper.</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h1 class="secondary">CHAPTER 24.</h1>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">OF THE LORD’S SUPPER.</h4>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> What is the Lord’s supper?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> An holy action instituted and<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn115"><sup>115</sup></a> appointed by Christ, to set forth his death, and communicate unto us spiritually his body and blood by faith, being represented by bread and wine, blessed by his word, and prayer, broken,<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn116"><sup>116</sup></a> poured out, and received of believers. Matthew 26:26-28; Luke 22:14-20; 1 Corinthians 11:23-25. Luke 22:19; 1 Corinthians 11:25, 26. Mark 14:22-24; 1 Corinthians 11:24, 25; John 6:63. 1 Corinthians 11:23, 25. 1 Corinthians 11:24; Matthew 26:26.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2.</b> When did Christ appoint this sacraments?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> On the night wherein he was betrayed to suffer. 1 Corinthians 11:23.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 3.</b> Whence is the right lose of it to be learned?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> From the word,<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn117"><sup>117</sup></a> practice, and actions of our Savior, at its institution.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 4.</b> What were the actions of our Savior to be imitated by us?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> First, blessing the elements by prayer; secondly, breaking the bread, and pouring out the wine; thirdly, distributing them to the receivers, sitting in a table-gesture. Matthew 26:26; Mark 14:22; Luke 22:19, 20; 1 Corinthians 11:23, 24.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 5.</b> What were the words of Christ?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> First, of command, — “Take, eat;” secondly, of promise, — “This is my body;” thirdly, of institution for perpetual use, — “This do,” etc. 1 Corinthians 11:24-26.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 6.</b> Who are to be<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn118"><sup>118</sup></a><a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn119"><sup>119</sup></a> receivers of this sacrament?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Those only have a true right to the signs who by faith in have an holy interest in Christ, the thing signified. 1 Corinthians 11:27-29; John 6:63.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 7.</b> Do the elements remain bread and wine still, after the blessing of them?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Yes; all the spiritual change is wrought by the faith of the receiver, not the words of the giver: to them that believe, they are the body and blood of Christ. John 6:63; 1 Corinthians 10:4, 11:29.</p>
<p>29.</p></section>
  </body>
</html>
