<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 22 - Of the Sacraments of the New Covenant In Particular</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section><h1 class="secondary">CHAPTER 22</h1>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">OF THE SACRAMENTS OF THE NEW COVENANT IN</h4>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">PARTICULAR, A HOLY RIGHT WHEREUNTO IS THE FOURTH</h4>
<h4 class="chapter-subtitle">PRIVILEGE OF BELIEVERS.</h4>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 1.</b> What are the seals of the New Testament?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Sacraments instituted of Christ to be visible seats and pledges, whereby God in him confirmeth the promises of the covenant to all believers, restipulating of them growth in faith and obedience. Mark 16:16; John 3:5; Acts 2:38, 22:16; Romans 4:11 1 Corinthians 10:2-4, 11:26-29.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 2.</b> How does God by these sacraments bestow grace upon us?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Not by any<a class="noteref" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref" href="endnotes.xhtml#fn112"><sup>112</sup></a> real essential conveying of spiritual grace by corporeal means, but by the way of promise, obsignation, and covenant, confirming the grace wrought in us by the Word and Spirit. Hebrews 4:2; 1 Corinthians 10; Romans 4:11, 1:17; Mark 16:16; Ephesians 5:26. confirming the grace wrought in us by the Word and Spirit.</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>Q. 3.</b> How do our sacraments differ from the sacraments of the Jews?</p>
<p class="catechism-item"><b>A.</b> Accidentally only, in things concerning the outward matter and form, as their number, quality, clearness of signification, and the like, — not essentially, in the things signified, or grace confirmed. 1 Corinthians 10:1,2, 3, etc.; John 6:35; 1 Corinthians 5:7; Philippians 3:3; Colossians 2:11.</p></section>
  </body>
</html>
