<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Footnotes</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="footnotes" role="doc-endnotes" hidden="hidden">
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn1">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">1</span> The Christian Ministry, p. 42-44, by the Rev. Charles Bridges, A.M.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn2">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">2</span> See his interesting History of the British Churches in the Netherlands.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn3">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">3</span> Mr. Ryland of Northampton entertained a strong opinion in regard to the value of the same work. In a tract entitled, “A Select Library for the Student of Divinity,” he gives an estimate of its merits with an amusing intensity of expression. “This book,” says he, “bears the same rank, and has the same relation to the study of divinity, which the ‘Principia’ of Sir Isaac Newton bears to the true system of the world, in the study of natural philocephy and it is of equal importance to all young divines which that great man’s work is to young philosophers. — Dr. Owen wrote this most learned of all his works in the meridian of his life, when he was vice-chancellor of Oxford, and published it soon after he quitted that office. This book gives an account of the nature, source and study of true divinity in all ages, but especially since the Christian dispensation of the glorious Gospel. The last chapters of the book are peculiarly sweet and excellent; his directions to students how to proceed in attaining furniture for their sacred office, are wine, serious, and evangelical in the highest degree. Nothing can be more rich, savoury, and divine. I am ashamed of my countryment for their ignorance this incomparable work, — perhaps the very greatest of the kind that ever was written by a British divine; and it now lies buried in dust, amidst the lumber of a booksellers garret, whilst a thousand volumes of wretched trash in divinity, with their pompous bindings armed us monuments of human folly, in our book cases and libraries. See Dr. Cotton Mather’s “Student and Preacher,” republished by John Ryland, A.M. of Northampton, 1781.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn4">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">4</span> A statement occurs in the “Encyclopaedia Britannica” that Owen’s works are printed in seven folio volumes. If it be meant that there are seven folio volumes of Owen’s works, there is a sense in which the statement is true; but the folios must be of unprecedented size which could include all the works of our author in this number. It is an obvious mistake.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn5">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">5</span> <span lang="el" xml:lang="el">Κατοπτρίζω</span>
 does not admit of the signification here ascribed to it by Dr Owen. It denotes looking into a mirror, not through a telescope: “Beholding the glory of the Lord as reflected and radiant in the Gospel.” See Dr Robinson’s Lexicon. Another view is taken of the passage, by which a tacit antithesis is instituted between 
 <span lang="el" xml:lang="el">κάτοπτρον</span> 
 and 
 <span lang="el" xml:lang="el">ἐικών</span>
 : “Dominus nos 
 <span lang="el" xml:lang="el">κατοπτρίζει</span>
 , splendorem faciei suae in corda nostram, tanquam in specula immittens: nos illum splendorem suscipimus et referimus. Elegans antitheton ad 
 <span lang="el" xml:lang="el">ἐντετυπωμένη</span>
 , insculpta. Nam quae insculpuntur fiunt paullatim: quae in speculo repraesentantur, fiunt celerrime.” Bengelii Gnomon in locum. Owen himself gives a correct explanation of the passage in his work on the Mortification of Sin, chap. 12. Ed.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn6">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">6</span> Peter Lombard. Born near Novara in Lombardy died in 1164, bishop of Paris called “Magister Sententiarum,” from one of his works, which is a compilation of sentences from the Fathers, arranged so as to form a system of Divinity, and held in high repute during mediaeval times. It appeared in 1172. ED.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn7">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">7</span> The first four of these terms were adopted by the Fourth OEcumenical 
 

Council, held a Chalcedon, A.D. 451. ED.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn8">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">8</span> Eutyches was a prsbyter and abbot at Constantinople, and distinguished himself by his opposition to the Nestorians, A.D. 448, asserting that in Christ there is but one nature, and was condemned by the General Council at Chalcedon, A.D. 451. In the preface to this work, p. 11, he is called “The Archimandrite.” Mandrite is a Syriac word for “monk.” Archimandrite corresponds with the term “abbot” in Europe. ED.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn9">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">9</span> Born at Germanicia, in the north or Syria ordained a presbyter at 
 


 Antioch appointed patriarch of Constantinople A.D.428 objected to the epithet 
 <span lang="el" xml:lang="el">Θεοτόκος</span>
 , as applied to the Virgin Mary, because “that God should be born of a human being is impossible” charged in consequence with maintaining that Christ was a mere man held in reality the distinct separation of the divine and human natures of Christ, insisting on a connection between them by 
 <span lang="el" xml:lang="el">συνάφεια</span> 
 (junction), or 
 <span lang="el" xml:lang="el">ἐνοίκησις</span>
 (indwelling), in opposition to 
 <span lang="el" xml:lang="el">ἕνωσις</span>
 (union) deposed by the Third General Council of Ephesus, A.D.431, and died probably before A.D. 450. ED.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn10">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">10</span> The expression quoted by Dr Owen is founded upon the phrase in the original language, 
 <span lang="el" xml:lang="el">διεληλυθότα τοὺς οὐρανόυς</span>
 “having passed through,” not “into the heavens,” as it stands in our version. ED.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn11">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">11</span> Dr Owen refers to the Emperor Hadrian, who, among other short poems which have been ascribed to him, is said to have composed, towards his death, the following lines:- 
 
 “Animula, vagula, blandula, 
 
 
 Hospes comesque corporis, 
 
 
 Quae nunc abibis in loca? 
 
 
 Pallidula, rigida, nudula, 
 
 
 Nec, ut soles, dabis joca.”</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn12">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">12</span> See the preceding treatise, “Christologia; or, a Declaration of the 
 

Glorious Mystery of the Person of Christ.”</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn13">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">13</span> The DOCETAE, to whom Dr. Owen refers, were a sect of the Asiatic Gnostics. The founder of the sect was Marcion, who was born in Pontus, near the beginning of the second century. He held that Christ was a manifestation of God under the appearance of man. The name was applied to some who, in the beginning of the sixth century, held that the body of Christ was not created, and therefore, that he only appeared to sleep, hunger, thirst, and suffer. ED.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn14">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">14</span> In Dr Owen’s work entitled, “Exposition of the Epistle to the 
 

Hebrews.”</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn15">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">15</span> See his “Christologia,” &amp;c., chap. 4., p. 54 of this volume.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn16">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">16</span> The “Vindiciae Evangelicae” is a work which Dr Owen wrote in reply to Biddle the Socinian, and which will be found in another department of this edition of his works. ED.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn17">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">17</span> See note, p. 222 of this volume. Telescopes were not invented till the close of the sixteenth century. ED.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn18">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">18</span> The Discourses that follow were first printed in 1691, eight years after the death of Dr. Owen. This circumstance may explain the absence of the Italics, of which he generally made free use in all his publications. — Ed.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn19">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">19</span> Every one out of this way everlastingly damned.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn20">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">20</span> The life of religion is in the Life.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn21">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">21</span> Popish traditions are false lights, leading from God.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn22">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">22</span> The authority of the Scripture dependeth not on the authority of the church, as the Papists blaspheme.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn23">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">23</span> All human inventions unnecessary helps in the worship of God.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn24">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">24</span> The word thereof is the sole directory for faith, worship, and life.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn25">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">25</span> This alone persuadeth and inwardly convinceth the heart of the divine verity of the Scripture; other motives, also, there are from without, and unanswerable arguments to prove the truth of them; as, 1. Their antiquity; 2. Preservation from fury; 3. Prophecies in them; 4. The holiness and majesty of their doctrine, agreeable to the nature of God; 5. Miracles; 6. The testimony of the church of all ages; 7. The blood of innumerable martyrs, &amp;c.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn26">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">26</span> The perfection of God’s being is known of us chiefly by removing all imperfections.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn27">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">27</span> Hence the abominable vanity of idolaters, and of the blasphemous 
 

Papists, that picture God.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn28">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">28</span> Let us prostrate ourselves in holy adoration of that which we cannot comprehend.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn29">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">29</span> The divers names of God signify one and the same thing, but under diverse notions in repect of our conception.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn30">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">30</span> Some of these attributes belong so unto God, as that they are in no sort to be ascribed to any else, as infiniteness, eternity, &amp;c. Others are after a sort attributed to some of his creatures, in that he communicateth unto them some of the effects of them in himself, as life, goodness, &amp;c.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn31">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">31</span> The first of these are motives to humble adoration, fear, self- abhorrency; the other, to faith, hope, love, and confidence, through Jesus Christ.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn32">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">32</span> Nothing is to be ascribed unto God, nor imagined of him, but what is exactly agreeable to those his glorious properties.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn33">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">33</span> These last are no less essential unto God than the former; only we thus distinguish them, because these are chiefly seen in his works.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn34">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">34</span> This is that mysterious ark that must not be pried into, nor the least little spoken about it, wherein plain Scripture goeth not before.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn35">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">35</span> To deny the Deity of any one person, is in effect to deny the whole Godhead; for whosoever hath not the Son, hath not the Father.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn36">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">36</span> This only doctrine remained undefiled in the Papacy.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn37">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">37</span> We must labour to make out comfort from the proper work of every person towards us.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn38">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">38</span> The purposes and decrees of God, so far as by him revealed, are objects of our faith, and full of comfort.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn39">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">39</span> Farther reasons of God’s decrees than his own will, not to be inquired after.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn40">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">40</span> The changes in the Scripture ascribed unto God are only in the outward dispensations and works, variously tending to one infallible event, by him proposed.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn41">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">41</span> The Arminians’ blasphemy, in saying God sometimes fails of his purposes.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn42">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">42</span> The decree of election is the fountain of all spiritual graces, for they are bestowed only on the elect.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn43">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">43</span> In nothing doth natural corruption more exalt itself against God, than in opposing the freedom of his grace in his eternal decrees.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn44">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">44</span> From the execution of these decrees flows that variety and difference we see in the dispensation of the means of grace, God sending the Gospel where he hath a remnant according to election.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn45">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">45</span> The very outward works of God are sufficient to convince men of his eternal power and Godhead, and to leave them inexcusable, if they serve him not.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn46">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">46</span> The glory of God is to be preferred above our own either being or well-being, as the supreme end of them.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn47">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">47</span> The approaching unto God in his service is the chief exaltation of our nature above the beasts that perish.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn48">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">48</span> God never allowed, from the beginning, that the will of the creature should be the measure of his worship and honour.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn49">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">49</span> Though we have all lost our right unto the promise of the fist covenant, yet all not restored by Christ are under the commination and curse thereof.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn50">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">50</span> To this providence is to be ascribed all the good we do enjoy, and all the afflictions we undergo.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn51">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">51</span> Fortune, chance, and the like, are names without things, scarce fit to be used among Christians, seeing Providence certainly ruleth all to appointed ends.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn52">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">52</span> No free-will in man exempted either from the eternal decree or the overruling providence of God.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn53">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">53</span> Though the dispensations of God’s providence towards his people be various, yet every issue and act of it tends to one certain end, their good in his glory.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn54">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">54</span> Almighty God knows how to bring light out of darkness, good out of evil, the salvation of his elect out of Judas’s treachery, the Jews’ cruelty, and Pilate’s injustice.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn55">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">55</span> This law of God bindeth us now, not because delivered to the Jews on Mount Horeb, but because written in the hearts of all by the finger of God at the first.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn56">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">56</span> After the fall, the law ceased to be a rule of justification, and became a rule for sanctification only.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn57">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">57</span> It is of free grace that God giveth power to yield any obedience, and accepteth of any obedience that is not perfect.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn58">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">58</span> This is that which commonly is called original sin, which in general denoteth the whole misery and corruption of our nature; as, 1. The guilt of Adam’s actual sin to us imputed; 2. Loss of God’s glorious image, innocency and holiness; 3. Deriving by propagation a nature (1.) Defiled with the pollution, (2.) Laden with the guilt, (3.) Subdued to the power of sin; 4. A being exposed to all temporal miseries, leading to and procuring death; 5. An alienation from God, with voluntary obedience to Satan and lust; 6. An utter disability to good, or to labour for mercy; 7. Eternal damnation of body and soul in hell.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn59">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">59</span> All that a natural man hath on this side hell is free mercy.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn60">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">60</span> The end of this is Jesus Christ, to all that fly for refuge to the hope set before them.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn61">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">61</span> This is that great mystery of godliness that the angels themselves admire; the most transcendent expression of God’s infinite love, the laying forth of all the treasure of his wisdom and goodness.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn62">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">62</span> 1. Though our Saviour Christ be one God with his Father, he is not one person with him. 2. Jesus Christ is God and man in one, not a God and a man; God incarnate, not a man deified. 3. The essential properties of either nature remain in his person theirs still, not communicated unto the other; as of the Deity to be eternal, everywhere; of the humanity, to be born and die. 4. Whatever may be said of either nature may be said of his whole person; so God may be said to die, but not the Godhead; the man Christ to be everywhere, but not his humanity; for his one person is all this. 5. The monstrous figment of transubstantiation, or Christ’s corporeal presence in the sacrament, fully overthrows our Saviour’s human nature, and makes him a mere shadow. 6. All natural properties are double in Christ, as will, &amp;c., still distinct; all personal, as subsistence, single.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn63">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">63</span> In the exercise of these offices, Christ is also the sole head, husband, and firstborn of the church.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn64">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">64</span> Papal usurpation upon these offices of Christ manifests the pope to be the Man of Sin.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn65">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">65</span> Christ’s subjects are all born rebels, and are stubborn, until he make them obedient by his Word and Spirit.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn66">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">66</span> Christ hath not delegated his kingly power of law-making for his church to any here below.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn67">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">67</span> The end of Christ in exercising his kingly power over his enemies, is the glory of his gospel and the good of his people.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn68">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">68</span> Against both these the Papists are exceedingly blasphemous; against the one, by making their mass a sacrifice for sins, the other, by making saints mediators of intercession.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn69">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">69</span> Chris’s undergoing punishment for us was, first, typified by the old sacrifices; secondly, foretold in the fist promise; thirdly, made lawful and valid in itself, first, by God’s determination, the supreme lawgiver; 
 

secondly, his own voluntary undergoing it; thirdly, by a relaxation of the law in regard of the subject punished; fourthly, beneficial to us, because united to us; as, first, our head; secondly, our elder brother; thirdly, our sponsor or surety; fourthly, our husband; fifthly, our God, or Redeemer, &amp;c.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn70">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">70</span> No change in all these, but what necessarily follows the change of the persons sustaining.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn71">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">71</span> The death that Christ underwent was eternal in its own nature and tendence, not so to him, because of his holiness, power, and the unity of his person.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn72">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">72</span> He suffered not as God, but he suffered who was God.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn73">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">73</span> We are freed from the anger of God, by a perfect rendering to the full value of what he required, from the power of Satan, by absolute conquest on our behalf.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn74">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">74</span> The new covenant is Christ’s legacy, in his last will unto his people, the eternal inheritance of glory being conveyed thereby.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn75">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">75</span> The death of Christ was satisfactory in respect of the strict justice of God, meritorious in respect of the covenant between him and his Father.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn76">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">76</span> All these holy truths are directly denied bgy the blasphemous 
 

Socinians; and by the Papists, with their merits, masses, penance, and purgatory, by consequent, overthrown.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn77">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">77</span> To make saints our intercessors, is to renounce Jesus Christ from being a sufficient Saviour.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn78">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">78</span> Christ differed from all other prophets; first, in his sending, which was immediately from the bosom of his Father; secondly, his assistance, which was the fulness of the Spirit; thirdly, his manner of teaching, with authority.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn79">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">79</span> To accuse his Word of imperfection, in doctrine or discipline, is to deny him a perfect prophet, or to have borne witness unto all truth.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn80">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">80</span> The humiliation of Christ shows us what we must here do and suffer, his exaltation, what we may hope for.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn81">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">81</span> The first of these holds forth his mighty love to us, the other his mighty power in himself.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn82">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">82</span> The only way to heaven is by the cross.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn83">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">83</span> Christ giveth life to all that world for whom he gave his life.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn84">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">84</span> None that he died for shall ever die.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn85">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">85</span> To say that Christ died for every man universally, is to affirm that he did no more for the elect than the reprobates, for them that are saved than for them that are damned; which is the Arminian blasphemy.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn86">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">86</span> The elect angels belong to this church.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn87">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">87</span> No distance of time or place breaks the unity of this church: heaven and earth, from the beginning of the world unto the end, are comprised in it.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn88">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">88</span> No mention in Scripture of any church in purgatory.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn89">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">89</span> This is the catholic church; though that term be not to be found in the 
 

Word in this sense, the thing itself is obvious.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn90">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">90</span> The pope, challenging unto himself the title of the head of the catholic church, is blasphemously rebellious against Jesus Christ.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn91">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">91</span> This is that ark out of which whosoever is shall surely perish.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn92">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">92</span> Of this faith the Holy Spirit is the efficient cause, the Word, the instrumental; the Law indirectly, by discovering our misery; the Gospel immediately, by holding forth a Saviour.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn93">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">93</span> Faith is in the understanding, in respect of its being and subsistence, in the will and heart, in repect of its effectual working.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn94">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">94</span> Our effectual calling is the first effect of our everlasting election.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn95">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">95</span> We have no actual interest in nor right unto Christ, until we are thus called.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn96">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">96</span> They who so boast of the strenght of free-will in the work of our conversion, are themselves and example what it is being given up to so vile an error, destitute of the grace of God.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn97">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">97</span> Legal and evangelical justification differ; first, on the part of the persons to be justified, the one requiring a person legally and perfectly righteous, the other a believing sinner; secondly, on the part of God, who in the one is a severe, righteous judge, in the other, a merciful, reconciled Father; thirdly, in the sentence, which in the one acquitteth, as having done nothing amiss, in the other, as having all amiss pardoned.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn98">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">98</span> Repentance includeth, first, alteration of the mind into a hatred of sin, before loved; secondly, sorrow of the affections for sin committed; thirdly, change of the actions arising from both.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn99">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">99</span> Repentance is either legal, servile, and terrifying, from the spirit of bondage; or evangelical, filial, and comforting, from the spirit of free grace and liberty, which only is available.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn100">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">100</span> Every part of Popish repentance viz., contrition, confession, and satisfaction was performed by Judas.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn101">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">101</span> All faith and profession, without this holiness, is vain and of no effect.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn102">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">102</span> True faith can no more be without true hoiness than true fire without heat.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn103">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">103</span> Merit of works in unprofitable servants, no way able to do their duty, is a Popish miracle.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn104">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">104</span> In Christ are our persons accepted freely, and for him our obedience.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn105">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">105</span> The best duties of unbelievers are but white sins.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn106">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">106</span> By virtue of this union, Christ suffereth in our afflictions; and we fill up in our bodies what remaineth as his.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn107">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">107</span> From Christ, as head of the church, we have spiritual life, sense, and motion, or growth in grace; secondly, as the husband of the church, love and redemption; thirdly, as the foundation thereof, stability and perseverance.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn108">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">108</span> This is that great honour and dignity of believers, which exalts them to a despising all earthly thrones.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn109">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">109</span> Our liberty is our inheritance here below, which we ought to contend for, against all opposers.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn110">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">110</span> Nothing makes men condemn the law as a rule, but hatred of that universal holiness which it doth require.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn111">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">111</span> Rule and authority are as necessary for human society as fire and water for our lives.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn112">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">112</span> This is one of the greatest mysteries of the Roman magic and juggling, that corporeal elements should have a power to forgive sins, and confer spiritual grace.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn113">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">113</span> Not the want, but the contempt of this sacrement, is damnable.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn114">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">114</span> It is hard to say whether the error of the Papists, requiring baptism of absolute, indispensable necessity to the salvation of every infant, or that of the Anabaptists, debarring them from it altogether, be the most uncharitable.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn115">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">115</span> Baptism is the sacrament of our new birth, this of our farther growth in Christ.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn116">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">116</span> No part of Christian religion was ever so vilely contaminated and abused by profane wretches, as this pure, holy, plain action and institution of our Saviour: witness the Popish horrid monster of transubstantiation, and their idolatrous mass.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn117">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">117</span> Whatever is more than these, is of our own.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn118">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">118</span> Faith in God’s promises, which it doth confirm, union with Christ, whereof it is a seal, and obedience to the right use of the ordinance itself, are required of all receivers.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn119">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">119</span> There is not any one action pertaining to the spiritual nature of this sacrament, not any end put upon it by Christ, as, first, the partaking of his body and blood; secondly, setting forth his death for us; thirdly, declaring of our union with him and his, but requires faith, grace, and holiness, in the receivers.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn120">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">120</span> By virtue of this, we partake in all the good and evil of the people of 
 

God throughout the world.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn121">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">121</span> Every corruption doth not presently unchuch a people.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn122">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">122</span> Unholiness of fellow-worshippers defileth not God’s ordinances.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn123">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">123</span> Ministers are the bishops of the Lord; lord-bishops came from Rome.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote endnote" role="doc-footnote doc-endnote" id="fn124">
        <p class="footnote"><span class="fn-link">124</span> The resurrection of the flesh hereafter is a powerful motive to live after the Spirit here.</p>
      </aside>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>
