<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Table of Contents</title>
    <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><!--?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?-->



  <title>Table of Contents</title>
  <link href="style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>


<nav epub:type="toc" id="toc" role="doc-toc">
<h2>Table of Contents</h2>
<ol>
<li><a href="ch001.xhtml">General Preface.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch002.xhtml">Christologia - A Declaration of the Glorious Mystery</a>
<ol>
<li><a href="ch003.xhtml">Prefatory Note (Christologia)</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch004.xhtml">Preface (Christologia)</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch005.xhtml">Chapter 1 - Peter's Confession</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch006.xhtml">Chapter 2 - Opposition Made Unto the Church</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch007.xhtml">Chapter 3 - the Person of Christ the Most Ineffable Effect of Divine Wisdom</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch008.xhtml">Chapter 4 - to Person of Christ the Foundation of All</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch009.xhtml">Chapter 5 - the Person of Christ the Great Representative of God</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch010.xhtml">Chapter 6 - the Person of Christ the Great Repository of Sacred Truth</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch011.xhtml">Chapter 7 - Power and Efficacy Communicated Unto the Office of Christ</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch012.xhtml">Chapter 8 - the Faith of the Church Under the Old Testament</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch013.xhtml">Chapter 9 - Honor Due to the Person of Christ</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch014.xhtml">Chapter 10 - the Principle of the Assignation of Divine Honor Unto the Person of Christ</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch015.xhtml">Chapter 11 - Obedience Unto Christ</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch016.xhtml">Chapter 12 - the Especial Principle of Obedience Unto the Person of Christ</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch017.xhtml">Chapter 13 - the Nature, Operations, and Causes of Divine Love</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch018.xhtml">Chapter 14 - Motives Unto the Love of Christ</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch019.xhtml">Chapter 15 - Conformity Unto Christ</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch020.xhtml">Chapter 16 - an Humble Inquiry Into, and Prospect Of, the Infinite Wisdom of God</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch021.xhtml">Chapter 17 - Other Evidences of Divine Wisdom in the Contrivance of the Work of Redemption</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch022.xhtml">Chapter 18 - the Nature of the Person of Christ</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch023.xhtml">Chapter 19 - the Exaltation of Christ</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch024.xhtml">Chapter 20 - the Exercise of the Mediatory Office of Christ in Heaven</a>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
<li><a href="ch025.xhtml">Meditations and Discourses On The Glory of Christ</a>
<ol>
<li><a href="ch026.xhtml">Prefatory Note (Glory of Christ)</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch027.xhtml">Preface (Glory of Christ)</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch028.xhtml">Chapter 1 - the Explication of the Text.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch029.xhtml">Chapter 2 - the Glory of the Person of Christ</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch030.xhtml">Chapter 3 - the Glory of Christ in the Mysterious Constitution of His Person.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch031.xhtml">Chapter 4 - the Glory of Christ in His Susception of the Office of a Mediator</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch032.xhtml">Chapter 5 - the Glory of Christ in This Love.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch033.xhtml">Chapter 6 - the Glory of Christ in the Discharge of His Mediatory Office</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch034.xhtml">Chapter 7 - the Glory of Christ in His Exaltation After the Accomplishment of the Work</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch035.xhtml">Chapter 8 - Representations of the Glory of Christ Under the Old Testament.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch036.xhtml">Chapter 9 - the Glory of Christ in His Intimate Conjunction With the Church</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch037.xhtml">Chapter 10 - the Glory of Christ in the Communication of Himself Unto Believers</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch038.xhtml">Chapter 11 - the Glory of Christ in the Recapitulation of All Things in Him.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch039.xhtml">Chapter 12 - Differences Between Our Beholding the Glory of Christ by Faith in This World and by Sight in Heaven</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch040.xhtml">Chapter 13 - the Second Difference Between Our Beholding the Glory of Christ by Faith in This World and by Sight in Heaven</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch041.xhtml">Chapter 14 - Other Differences Between Our Beholding the Glory of Christ by Faith in This World</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch042.xhtml">Preface (Glory of Christ)</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch043.xhtml">Chapter 1 - Meditations and Discourses Concerning The Glory of Christ</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch044.xhtml">Chapter 2 - the Way and Means of the Recovery of Spiritual Decays</a>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
<li><a href="ch045.xhtml">Two Short Catechisms:</a>
<ol>
<li><a href="ch046.xhtml">Prefatory Note (Catechisms)</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch047.xhtml">To My Loving Neighbors and Christian Friends.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch048.xhtml">The Lesser Catechism</a>
<ol>
<li><a href="ch049.xhtml">Chapter 1 - of the Scripture.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch050.xhtml">Chapter 2 - of God.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch051.xhtml">Chapter 3 - of the Holy Trinity.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch052.xhtml">Chapter 4 - of the Works of God; And, First, of Those That Are Internal and Immanent.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch053.xhtml">Chapter 5 - of the Works of God That Outwardly Are of Him.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch054.xhtml">Chapter 6 - of God's Actual Providence.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch055.xhtml">Chapter 7 - of the Law of God.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch056.xhtml">Chapter 8 - of the State of Corrupted Nature.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch057.xhtml">Chapter 9 - of the Incarnation of Christ.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch058.xhtml">Chapter 10 - of the Person of Jesus Christ.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch059.xhtml">Chapter 11 - of the Offices of Christ; And, First, of His Kingly.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch060.xhtml">Chapter 12 - of Christ's Priestly Office.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch061.xhtml">Chapter 13 - of Christ's Prophetical Office.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch062.xhtml">Chapter 14 - of the Two-fold Estate of Christ.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch063.xhtml">Chapter 15 - of the Persons to Whom the Benefits of Christ's Offices Do Belong.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch064.xhtml">Chapter 16 - of the Church.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch065.xhtml">Chapter 17 - of Faith.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch066.xhtml">Chapter 18 - of Our Vocation, or God's Calling Us.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch067.xhtml">Chapter 19 - of Justification.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch068.xhtml">Chapter 20 - of Sanctification.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch069.xhtml">Chapter 21 - of the Privileges of Believers.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch070.xhtml">Chapter 22 - Of the Sacraments of the New Covenant In Particular</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch071.xhtml">Chapter 23 - of Baptism.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch072.xhtml">Chapter 24 - of the Lord's Supper.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch073.xhtml">Chapter 25 - of the Communion of Saints,</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch074.xhtml">Chapter 26 - Of Particular Churches.</a>
</li>
<li><a href="ch075.xhtml">Chapter 27 - of the Last Privilege of Believers, Being the Door of Entrance Into Glory.</a>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
<li><a href="ch076.xhtml">Footnotes</a>
</li>
</ol>
</nav>
<nav epub:type="landmarks">
<h2>Guide</h2>
<ol>
  <li><a epub:type="cover" href="cover.xhtml">Cover</a></li>
  <li><a epub:type="toc" href="nav.xhtml">Table of Contents</a></li>
  <li><a epub:type="frontispiece" href="frontispiece.xhtml">Frontispiece</a></li>
  <li><a epub:type="bodymatter" href="ch001.xhtml">Start of Content</a></li>
</ol>
</nav>

</body>
</html>
